Make `./mk/run-test.sh` work by itself; add `mk/debug-test.sh` (#7470)
NixOS/nix: doc/manual/src/contributing/hacking.md

$ make tests/${testName}.sh.test
ran test tests/${testName}.sh... [PASS]
```
or without `make`, with:
```shell-session
$ ./mk/run_test.sh tests/${testName}.sh
ran test tests/${testName}.sh... [PASS]
```

To see the output unsuppressed, one can also run
```shell-session
$ ./mk/debug_test.sh tests/${testName}.sh
+ foo
output from foo
+ bar
output from bar
...
```
The test script will be traced with `set -x` and the output displayed as it happens, regardless of whether the test succeeds or fails.

#### Debugging failing functional tests

When a functional test fails, one is quite lucky if it does so on the first line.
More commonly, the test failure somewhere in the middle of the script.

To figure out what's wrong, it is convenient to run the test up to the failing nix command, and then run that test with a debugger like GDB.

For example, if the script looks like:
```bash
foo
nix blah blub
bar
```
on would could edit it like so:
```diff
 foo
-nix blah blub
+gdb --args nix blah blub
 bar
```

Then, when one runs the script with `./mk/debug_test.sh`, it will drop them into GDB once the script reaches that:
```shell-session
$ ./mk/debug_test.sh tests/${testName}.sh
...

> + gdb blash blub GNU gdb (GDB) 12.1

Author: oops these lines got combined.
```suggestion
+ gdb blash blub
GNU gdb (GDB) 12.1
```

...

> (gdb) █

Author: Does any one know what the character is for an *empty* box cursor is? (When my terminal emulator is inactive because the focus is elsewhere, I get that instead of the filled-in box.) I think that would be more appropriate.

### Functional tests

The functional tests reside under the `tests` directory and are listed in `tests/local.mk`.
Each test is a bash script.

> The whole testsuite can be run with:
> ```shell-session
> $ make install && make installcheck
> ran test tests/foo.sh... [PASS]
> ran test tests/bar.sh... [PASS]
> ...
> ```
> 
> Individual tests can be run with:
> ```shell-session
> $ make tests/${testName}.sh.test
> ran test tests/${testName}.sh... [PASS]
> ```
> or without `make`, with:
> ```shell-session
> $ ./mk/run_test.sh tests/${testName}.sh
> ran test tests/${testName}.sh... [PASS]
> ```
> 
> To see the output unsuppressed, one can also run
> ```shell-session
> $ ./mk/debug_test.sh tests/${testName}.sh
> + foo
> output from foo
> + bar
> output from bar
> ...
> ```
> The test script will be traced with `set -x` and the output displayed as it happens, regardless of whether the test succeeds or fails.

Reviewer: Add whitespace between paragraphs for better source readability, also minor rewording of instructions. Would be great if you could do that for the other parts, too.

````suggestion
The whole testsuite can be run with:

```shell-session
$ make install && make installcheck
ran test tests/foo.sh... [PASS]
ran test tests/bar.sh... [PASS]
...
```

Individual tests can be run with `make`:

```shell-session
$ make tests/${testName}.sh.test
ran test tests/${testName}.sh... [PASS]
```

or without `make`:

```shell-session
$ ./mk/run_test.sh tests/${testName}.sh
ran test tests/${testName}.sh... [PASS]
```

To see the complet eoutput, one can also run:

```shell-session
$ ./mk/debug_test.sh tests/${testName}.sh
+ foo
output from foo
+ bar
output from bar
...
```

The test script will be traced with `set -x` and the output displayed as it happens, regardless of whether the test succeeds or fails.
````

#### Debugging failing functional tests

> When a functional test fails, one is quite lucky if it does so on the first line.
> More commonly, the test failure somewhere in the middle of the script.
> 
> To figure out what's wrong, it is convenient to run the test up to the failing nix command, and then run that test with a debugger like GDB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a functional test fails, it usually does so somewhere in the middle of the script.

To figure out what's wrong, it is convenient to run the test regularly up to the failing `nix` command, and then run that command with a debugger like GDB.
```

For example, if the script looks like:
```bash
foo
nix blah blub
bar
```

> on would could edit it like so:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
one would could edit it like so:
```

```diff
 foo
-nix blah blub
+gdb --args nix blah blub
 bar
```

> Then, when one runs the script with `./mk/debug_test.sh`, it will drop them into GDB once the script reaches that:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, when one runs the script with `./mk/debug_test.sh`, it will drop them into GDB once the script reaches that point:
```

```shell-session

> $ ./mk/debug_test.sh tests/${testName}.sh

Reviewer 2: Maybe rename to `debug-test.sh` (dash instead of underscore)? We don't really use underscores in the Nix project.

Reviewer 3: Maybe (?) we could also provide a `Makefile` target for that to be consistent with running the test. So that command would be something like `make test.${testName}.sh.debug`

Author: Both done.

...
+ gdb blash blub
GNU gdb (GDB) 12.1
...

> (gdb) █

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
(gdb) 
```

Let's keep it simple.

### Functional tests

The functional tests reside under the `tests` directory and are listed in `tests/local.mk`.
Each test is a bash script.

> The whole testsuite can be run with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The whole test suite can be run with:
```

I think?

```shell-session
$ make install && make installcheck
ran test tests/foo.sh... [PASS]
ran test tests/bar.sh... [PASS]
...
```

Individual tests can be run with `make`:

```shell-session
$ make tests/${testName}.sh.test
ran test tests/${testName}.sh... [PASS]
```

or without `make`:

```shell-session
$ ./mk/run-test.sh tests/${testName}.sh
ran test tests/${testName}.sh... [PASS]
```

> To see the complet eoutput, one can also run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To see the complete output, one can also run:
```

```shell-session
$ ./mk/debug-test.sh tests/${testName}.sh
+ foo
output from foo
+ bar
output from bar
...
```

> The test script will be traced with `set -x` and the output displayed as it happens, regardless of whether the test succeeds or fails.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The test script will then be traced with `set -x` and the output displayed as it happens, regardless of whether the test succeeds or fails.
```

#### Debugging failing functional tests

When a functional test fails, it usually does so somewhere in the middle of the script.

To figure out what's wrong, it is convenient to run the test regularly up to the failing `nix` command, and then run that command with a debugger like GDB.

For example, if the script looks like:

```bash
foo
nix blah blub
bar
```

> one would could edit it like so:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
edit it like so:
```

```diff
 foo
-nix blah blub
+gdb --args nix blah blub
 bar
```

> Then, when one runs the script with `./mk/debug-test.sh`, it will drop them into GDB once the script reaches that point:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, running the test with `./mk/debug-test.sh` will drop you into GDB once the script reaches that point:
```

```shell-session
$ ./mk/debug-test.sh tests/${testName}.sh
...
+ gdb blash blub
GNU gdb (GDB) 12.1
...
(gdb)
```

One can debug the Nix invocation in all the usual ways.

> (For exampling running `run` will run the Nix invocation.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, call `run` to start the Nix invocation.
```

Author: ```suggestion
For example, enter `run` to start the Nix invocation.
```
